Part 1 - Precursor to the Hellenistic Period.
Histories of the Hellenistic period generally begin with Alexander the Great, and his egomaniacal continent-long eastward march to India. 
In December of three thirty five BCE, before he ever left the Aegean world to fight Persians, Alexander had to subdue foes at home. The most formidable of these foes was Thebes, which, amidst the post-Peloponnesian War rumble, had slowly emerged as the dominant force in mainland Greece. Thebes was subject to Alexander's homeland of Macedon, and in the late autumn of three thirty five, acting on an incorrect rumor that young Alexander had died in a foreign campaign, the city of Thebes revolted. Alexander's retribution was swift. He and his armies covered a distance of hundreds of miles in two weeks. The Thebans retracted into their city, and a short siege began. Alexander offered the Thebans generous terms,  the two men at core of the revolt would be surrendered to him, and he'd withdraw his campaign-hardened troops, and consider the insurrection over. But the Thebans rejected the offer.
And so Alexander moved in and took the city. Thebes was his in a matter of days. That month, December of three thirty five, saw a sad sight in the hilly lake country thirty miles northwest of Athens. Every Theban who was not killed fighting was sold into slavery and the ancient city was leveled. It was a punishment of almost biblical proportions. On one hand Alexander's total destruction of Thebes was a successful scare tactic. Other Greek cities, Athens among them, capitulated readily thereafter to Macedonian leadership. But on the other hand, in hindsight, the ruination of Thebes was the first of many mistakes Alexander would make out of anger and impatience, mistakes which would leave the world he left behind him an awful place.
Following the wholesale destruction of Thebes, the notion of Macedon in the imagination of mainland Greece and the Peloponnese hardened irreversibly. To the southerners,  in Athens, Corinth, Sparta, and elsewhere, Alexander, like his father, was a crude northern barbarian, an oppressor with a bloated army full of men with long spears. It might be prudent to cooperate outwardly with him for the time being. But,  to the Greeks who learned of the annihilation of Thebes in the winter of three thirty five,  Macedon was an oppressor, and an alien hardly different from the Persian Empire. So the total destruction of Thebes presented Alexander with problem. Greece became a seething, untamed territory that would revolt at the slightest provocation, and Alexander had to leave a huge Macedonian military force behind just to guard his own kingdom's immediate southern front.
Alexander did not walk away from the decimation of Thebes empty handed. Tens of thousands of Thebans were sold into slavery. Their sale was, at least for the purposes of political theatre, a part of Alexander's punishment of the city state for attempting an insurgency. But practically speaking, selling the civilian victims of his conquests as slaves was one of Alexander's main fundraising strategies throughout the course of his short, violent career. His paymasters, supply trains and engineer corps needed barrels of silver in order to keep them operational, and so when Alexander saw as many as forty thousand Theban citizens vulnerable for the taking, he sold their liberty for immediate personal gain. Alexander's conquests were continually fueled by cash earned by selling his victims into slavery, which in turn destabilized Eurasian populations and would make mercenary armies and liquid assets more important than land ownership and territorial allegiances during the ensuing Hellenistic period.
In the year after destroying Thebes, Alexander headed eastward into Turkey. To any ambitious young general and king, splitting your forces nearly in half, leaving one half behind in territories you've subdued months before, and then leading the others into war with the largest empire in the world would seem tactically untenable. A year or two on the home front, on Alexander's part, spent ironing out relations in the Aegean world, and manning his own military with loyal Spartans and Athenians,  moreover, taking time to spin the eastward campaign as a war of Greek self assertion and get the major powers of the Aegean world behind him,  all of these things seem like they would have been a good idea. But Alexander did none of it. In three thirty four, a huge part of Alexander's motivations to head eastward were financial ones. He knew that Persian imperial command made almost two thousand silver talents a year from territories in modern day Turkey. Macedon, Alexander knew, and his own outsized military ambitions needed this money. So a major reason for his hasty departure to Asia Minor in three thirty four was a search for loot.
The story of Alexander the Great has often been staged as an ideologically motivated Greek campaign against an authoritarian Persian east. Modern biographers no longer tell this story. As historian Peter Green writes, Alexander had the Homeric pirate's mentality when it came to riches: the best way of acquiring them was by relieving less manly opponents of them in battle. Neither Alexander nor his father had any real economic sense beyond immediate needs. What all this meant was that the expedition was fundamentally disruptive rather than constructive in any unifying sense. It began with an urgent need for booty and ended in megalomania. It took over an empire that had lasted for two long centuries, shattered its theocratic rationale, patched a Macedonian superstructure onto its administrative system, treated its accumulated wealth as fairy gold to be poured out at will, and looked no further than the grandiose personal ambitions of its leader.
Alexander's was a ten year campaign that threw multiple continents into bloody disarray and left behind death, chaos, and a pack of hungry generals.

Part 2- The Attrition of the Diadochi Wolfpack.
Let's start at a high level from the close of the Alendran and dawn of the Helenistic Age. Alexander died in June of three twenty three. He died having had a Great-Pyramid sized tomb planned for himself, and also having commenced preparations for invasions of the Arabian Peninsula and the central Mediterranean. None of it materialized. When the great warlord died, the thing that had temporarily, forcibly unified a Greek, Turkish, Egyptian, Canaanite, Iraqi, Iranian, Afghani and Indian swath of turf ended. What was left was a small but hard Macedonian superstructure, screwed into the central economic nodes of territories Alexander had conquered. This superstructure, at the cost of hundreds of thousands of lives, was arranged and rearranged for the next fifty years by Alexander's successors, until something slightly more stable emerged.
In the winter and subsequent year after Alexander died, there was initially going to be an attempt to continue central Macedonian rule. Alexander had a younger brother who was mentally disabled. And, in his marriage to a Bactrian princess, Roxane, Alexander had managed to produce a male heir,  Bactria, by the way, was essentially the far north of modern day Afghanistan. So initially, Alexander's mentally disabled younger brother and an infant son were expected to take sovereignty of the huge empire, while seven successors were to begin regency in Macedon, central and northern Turkey, Egypt, Thrace, western Turkey, and eastern Turkey. Of course, Alexander left behind him a pack of wolves,  a militarily experienced pack of wolves accustomed over the past decade of far flung wars to winning loot, power, and territory by the sword. Murderous expansionism was what they had learned from Alexander, and they did not forget the lesson.
Four of the initial successor generals were dead by three twenty. Others rose up. Nine years later, a loose quintet had emerged, a quintet which already included Ptolemy in control of Egypt,  the beginning of the only dynasty which would last down to the end of the Hellenistic period. There was in three eleven still a vague idea that Alexander's son or younger brother would reunite the separated districts under central Macedonian rule,  indeed one of the successors, Cassander, was in charge of Europe nominally up until the point Alexander's child came of age. But in practice, Alexander's successors were hardly waiting with bated breath for their liege's pubescent son to come and rule over them. In fact, in three ten, Alexander's successor general Cassander had Alexander's son and wife murdered. For his trouble, over the next decade of war, Cassander received control of Greece, though he died in two ninety eight.
The year three hundred BCE would have been an particularly poor time to come to age, particularly in modern day Turkey. A conflict the size of a World War was raging,  successor generals hammered armies together in a battle royale that makes the Iliad look like a croquet match by comparison, and the details of these brutal decades are a whole discipline of study in and unto themselves. At the end of the carnage, in the last years of the 280s,  after seven decades of violence which had really started in the Greek speaking world with the campaigns of Philip the Second down into central Greece in the three fifties, the volume of war began to abate.
At this juncture, a ruler named Antigonus Gonatus was sovereign in Greece, Ptolemy the Second emerged from a succession dispute to begin a long and successful reign in Egypt, and a ruler named Antiochus the First, the son of Alexander's infantry general Seleucus the First, assumed power over the vast eastern region that would later be called the Seleucid empire. By the two seventies, the generation of Alexander's warlords had passed, in many cases as a result of hostilities between one another, and they left behind them something old and familiar,  a trio of hereditary monarchies. At least one of these monarchies,  the Ptolemies,  would last all the way down to thirty BCE. 

Part 3 - Persian Silver and the Economic Impacts of Alexander's Campaigns.
So far we've gone through the beginning of Alexander's campaign, and the moment that the dust began to settle from the wars of his successors. The trio of kingdoms still standing in the two seventies,  the Ptolemies in Egypt, Antigonids in the north and Eastern Mediterranean, and the Seleucids in the far east, were generally in conflict with one another, with the Ptolemies and Seleucids, particularly, fighting six wars between two seventy-four and one sixty-eight BCE. Let's focus on the three names we've generated so far, the Ptolemies in Egypt, Antigonids in the north and Eastern Mediterranean, and the Seleucids in the east. A triangle of hereditary monarchies ruled during much of the Hellenistic period, this triangle flexing and writhing according to the schemes and ambitions of its three ruling kings, the rise of new regional powers and insurgencies, and, increasingly, the slow eastward intrusion of Republican Rome.
Increasingly, Rome began to dictate terms to Hellenistic kings. The Seleucids and Ptolemies spent over a hundred years fighting one another. When they weren't fighting one another, a series of succession disputes,  particularly on the part of the Seleucids, who ground through fifteen kings during the 100s alone, kept life systemically unstable in these monarchies, as did rebellions by indigenous peoples within the imperial borders,  Egyptian peasants in the south of Ptolemaic Alexandria, or powerful leaders in modern day Afghanistan and India chiseling away at the Seleucid east until it began to cave in. Republican Rome is a fascinating point of contrast. Its system of consulships made leadership disputes,  at least until the end of the Hellenistic period,  nonexistent. It did not keep fighting the same foes for the same turf for many generations,  its great nemesis, Carthage, once defeated, stayed down. And so as the hereditary monarchies of the Seleucids, Ptolemies, and Antigonids suffered from all the normal problems of dynastic kingship, Rome just kept getting stronger, and larger, and more efficient, and more ambitious.

