Part 1 - Politics and War.
Peace was now made, but proved to be of short duration amid the schemes and plots of the leaders of the Empire. Valentine was appointed Count of the excubitors and received a promise that he should not be called to account for the money he had received from Philagrius, who was now recalled from exile, and that his soldiers should receive a generous donative. Meanwhile, the Caesar David was crowned as a third emperor under the name of Tiberius, whilst Valentine marched to Cappadocia to act against the Arabs who had taken advantage of the turmoil to resume their invasions. The troops in Cappadocia were firmly in Valentine's camp following the donative, and they produced a letter which purported to have been written by Martina to a certain David, in which he was urged to attack Valentine, marry Martina, and depose Constans. The letter caused an outcry and both soldiers and people rose against the Empress under the leadership of Theodore the Armenian. Theodore seized David in a fortress to which he had fled and had him decapitated, having the head exhibited all over the eastern provinces. On Theodore's return to Constantinople Martina was by decree of the Senate deprived of her tongue, and Heraclius and Tiberius of their noses, and they were all banished to the island province of Rhodes. Constans thus became sole emperor of Byzantium. 
All this must have been done at the instigation of Valentine, whose subsequent actions betray his ambitious nature. After unsuccessful operations against the Arabs in Cappadocia Valentine returned to Constantinople early in six forty-three. With a powerful guard of three-thousand men at his back he forced Constans to bestow on him the rank of Caesar. However, strong opposition to this manifested from amongst the emperor's followers, from the forbidding Varangian Guard and from senior members of the Church.  Unwilling to take the risk of forcing his claim, Valentine was lead into a compromise whereby he gave up the claim to the title of Caesar but was made commander of the troops in the capital, and gave his daughter in marriage to Constans. Yet, only two years later Valentine's tyrannical acts in Constantinople led to a popular rising, during which he was seized and beheaded.
This domestic turmoil at the head of the Empire and its military seriously de-stabilised the Empire and exposed it to the attacks of the new Arab armies rising in the south.  At a time when the Empire needed unity and outward vigilance, it instead turned inward and weakened itself through infighting, the removal of military forces from the critical border lands, and diversion of military and bureaucratic leaders from the normal tasks for warding the borders, let alone preparing for war. Most of all the Empire and its very top lacked the stable outward-looking perspective it had through previous centuries, and so failed to grasp the scale of the threat from the newly insurgent Arab Islamic forces on its borders.  

Part 2 - The Arab War.         
The Arabs first invaded Asia Minor during the commotions of six forty-one. A brief account of the aggressive Arab activities in the ten years after this shows the energy and purpose of the insurgent force.  In six forty-two a plan of Valentine for a combined attack on them was frustrated by his defeat; but Theodore and Procopius penetrated as far as Batnae, and an Armenian force occupied Amida and nearly reached Edessa before they were routed. In six forty-three, Valentine having returned to Constantinople, the enemy again entered Asia Minor, and Arabissus capitulated to Umair. In six forty-four Muawiya, amir of Syria, took and plundered Euchaita; and in six forty-six after besieging Caesarea for ten days he ravaged the neighbourhood, returned, and forced it to pay tribute, afterwards vainly attacking Amorium. On this expedition he found the Cilician fortresses deserted and left garrisons in them till his return, but in six forty-seven had them destroyed. In six forty-nine Habib, and in six fifty-one Busr, raided Isauria, and in that year Sufyan also invaded Roman territory from Germanicea, while in 6six forty-nine Muawiya placed a fleet on the sea and plundered Constantia in Cyprus, but retreated on the approach of a Roman fleet under Cacorizus the chamberlain. 
These attacks so far were primarily only plundering expeditions, just a pre-shadowing of the more serious and committed assaults on the Empire were to follow. About six forty-seven Habib occupied Melitene, Sozopetra, and Adata. As the war had gone against the Romans, Constans in six fifty-one sent Procopius to treat for peace with Muawiya and a truce was made for two years. The truce bound the Emperor to pay tribute and left Gregory, the nephew of Heraclius, as a hostage. 
The truce of six fifty one would prove to be brief and hardly more than nominal. The secession of Armenia led to the Emperor's expedition to that country the following year and to the outbreak of fresh hostilities there. After the expiration of the armistice the war was renewed on a larger scale than before. Great preparations were made by Mudawiya for an attack by sea and land upon Constantinople. He himself, starting from Melitene, took Ancyra and advanced to Dorylaeum in six fifty-three, destroying all the fortresses on the way. Meanwhile the Arabs were hastily building ships at Alexandria, Tripolis, and other places. In six fifty-four a fleet under Abul-Awar after occupying Cyprus pillaged Cos, Crete, and Rhodes. At Rhodes the famous colossus, long since fallen, was broken up by the Arab forces and sold to a Jewish merchant. But, while the work was going on at Tripolis, two Roman brothers who were slaves of Muawiya liberated the Roman prisoners, and with their help killed the governor and his guard, burnt the ships, and escaped by sea to Roman territory. Muawiya, who was probably recalled by the news of this disaster, did nothing this year beyond taking a fortress near Melitene. However, the naval preparations were not given up, and in spring six fifty-five Abul-Awar was sent to Phoenix in Lycia, a place celebrated for cypresses, to cut wood for shipbuilding, where he was joined by the Egyptian ships under Abdallah.

Part 3 - Religious and Cultural Developments.
A transformation similar to that expressed in language is clearly perceivable in the history of Art. Christianity introduced into the world a powerful new factor, the strength of which may be gauged in the paintings of the Catacombs and in the rise of new styles of architecture—the Byzantine and the Romanesque. Thus we have to deal not with mere deterioration and decay, but also with the lowering of the level of culture and the barbarization of art which make themselves felt in various ways. When Rome had to raise a triumphal arch to the conqueror of Maxentius, a great part of the reliefs for its adornment were carried over from the Arch of Trajan, while some sculptures were added by contemporary artists. And the latter perpetuate the decay of art and of aesthetic taste. The figures are distorted, the faces deformed. On the so-called discus of Theodosius the symbolical figures of the lower part were copied from ancient originals and are handsome. The upper half was filled with representations of living people, and it is evident that the gross, flat, ugly faces, the heavy embroidered uniforms, were reproduced with fidelity, while the handling of the figures strikes the observer by its clumsiness and faulty designs. The chief thing in the pictorial and plastic arts of the third and fourth centuries is not beauty or expression, but size and costly material. Gallienus, whose unfortunate reign was nicknamed the “period of the thirty tyrants”, ordered a statue of himself two hundred feet in height: it was planned on such a scale that a child was able to ascend by a winding staircase to the top of the Emperor's lance.