Flink versus Spark. That's going to be the focus of this video. We're going to talk about why these tools exist, some of their key differences, as well as some of the use cases, some actual places that people are using Spark and sometimes even has to decide between Spark versus Flink versus Spark. 
So, let's first talk about why do Flink and Spark exist? The obvious reason that data has grown to such great volume, velocity, veracity, all these big V's that we had to create frameworks and solutions that can actually handle and process these large data sets. In turn, Spark and Flink have both become very popular for that reason. They are able to manage and process large data sets ery efficiently. But honestly, sometimes it can feel like these two solutions get referenced a lot together. 
So, let's dive in. One could describe both solutions as open source distributed processing systems used for big data workloads. But if we dig into what Spark is, often described as, I'm going to take this quote from AWS. Spark essentially utilizes in-memory caching and optimizing query execution for fast analytical queries against data of any size. It provides development APIs in Java, Scala, Python, and R, and supports code reuse across multiple workloads. So, and it also can be used for batch processing and real-time analytics. Although sometimes the real-time analytics does require a little more work. I've definitely seen Spark used a lot more in batch, but streaming is coming along. 
One of the things you should have picked up from what I just said is the fact that Spark provides the ability to actually interact with multiple different languages um via its API. Essentially that lets you use its optimized query engine regardless of if you're using Python or Scala or SQL. Let's go over some of the other features that Spark offers. So if you dig into the initial papers uh with Spark, one of the ones that you will find is resilient distributed data sets, a fault tolerant extraction for in-memory cluster computing which hopefully then gets you to ask what is an RDD which is what it's usually referenced as, especially if you are accustomed to using Spark and likely you often find yourself trying to put things into a data frame you use the to data frame function. 
One of the biggest things you'll often hear referenced is RDD or resilient distributed data sets. Basically this is Spark's foundational abstraction. Essentially the RDD provides a fault tolerant immutable collection of objects that can be processed in parallel across a
computing cluster. So essentially RDDs offer fine grain control over data processing making Spark highly efficient and fall tolerant. Now, one could argue that that just sounds like a definition of some complex technical concept that doesn't necessarily make sense, which is
okay, that it doesn't make sense because if you even look up how often do you use an RDD or, you know, when to use one,most of the time you'll find that if you were, for example, to go on Reddit, people will tell you to not use them as they tend to be lower level implementations. And even as called out by one commenter, the Spark definitive guide even states to explicitly not use them. Instead, most of the time you'll likely be using the dataframe or SQL API, which is more explicit and lets you essentially create a table, which most people will understand more
clearly. This makes it far easier to work with a data frame versus an RDD. It's not to say you'll never use an RDD, but more frequently than not, you likely won't. At least that is in my experience. So let's put this into an actual usage. Let's stick on top of that the dataframe API which is basically building on top of the concept of RDDs. Spark essentially has these dataframes that offer you ability to interact with your data and manipulate it, using things like pandas and in turn allows you to run complex data transformations on top or simple ones. 
There are honestly several other features that Spark offers. It's this framework that gives you access to a optimized query engine that
lets you run in-memory queries on top of essentially their RDDs. 
So let's now dive into Flink before we go into the different use cases that I've seen people use uh Spark and Flink for. Now when we look at Flink, I think the thing that really distinguishes it against Spark is that it's really geared towards doing transformations and complex
transformations on streaming. It can handle robust data stream processing, meaning it can actually do things as your data is being streamed and it's built for that. If we go to flink.com, you'll see that basically if you were to look up what Apache Flink is, it defines it as a framework
and distributed processing engine for stateful computations over unbound and/or bounded data streams. So again, it centers around streams.  Flink has been designed to run in all common cluster environments, perform computations at in-memory speed at any scale. I think that's generally the big difference that you'll see. Spark at least in my mind initially was more developed for batch processing at least and that's how we use it at Facebook. 

